---
layout: single
show_date: false
tags : vpn remote ssh
title: How to use the VPN to connect to Flinders
author: Rob Edwards
---

# Using the VPN to connect to the Flinders network

When you connect to the VPN it makes it seem like you are on the Flinders University Network even if you are at a coffee shop, sitting at home, or lounging on your yacht. It means that you can access resources that are behind the Flinders firewall, like deepthought, but also so you can use the library and download journal articles.

There are several steps to getting the VPN up and running.

## Step 1. Enable MFA on your Flinders account

Multi-factor authentication is an additional layer of security. It requires you to have a device (usually a cell phone) that generates a unique semi-random number that identifies you. The number is not really random because the computer on the other end also knows what it is (the number is usually based on the time and date). When you log in, you enter the number on your phone, and the computer at the other end checks that it is correct.

The [Flinders MFA Website](https://students.flinders.edu.au/support/computing/mfa) has complete descriptions on how to do this. There are a couple of different free options you can use, including OKTA or Google Authenticator. If you have to use a similar system elsewhere it probably works here too.

Set up MFA, and then proceed with the next step.

## Step 2. Download CISCO AnyConnect. 

You can [download CISCO AnyConnect](https://vpn.flinders.edu.au/) from Flinders, but you will need your FAN, password, and now your MFA code! (Its a good way to try it out).

Download and install the software, which should just mean following the install prompts.


## Step 3. Login to the Flinders network.

When you open CISCO AnyConnect, enter the Flinders VPN URL: `vpn.flinders.edu.au`.

It will ask you for your FAN, password, and MFA code. Depending exactly how you set up the MFA in step 1, you maybe required to respond to a text message, click approve, or enter a number.


## Done!

That's it. You are connected to the Flinders VPN.




