---
layout: single
show_date: true
tags : turbocor pearson correlation statistics
title: "Fast correlations with turbocor"
author: Rob Edwards
---


We often want to calculate Pearson correlation between different datasets, for example, we have used it to identify the hosts of different phages.  Often, we want to calculate Pearson on really large matrices, and so our usual solution is to use [crappy code](https://github.com/linsalrob/EdwardsLab/blob/master/bin/correlations.py) and be patient!

However, recently Daniel Jones released [turbocor](https://github.com/dcjones/turbocor), a fast, rust-based implementation, of pairwise Pearson correlations, and so we are intrigued to work with it. Here is a brief guide to making correlations using `turbocor`.


# Installing turbocor

Of course, we want to install it using [conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/index.html) but there are a couple of simple gotchas that are easy to overcome. Here are some step by step instructions

Specifically, `hdf5-sys` requires `hdf5=1.10.1` at the moment, and balks at `hdf5=1.12.1` (the current version in anaconda).

### Step 1: Create the conda environment and install hdf5
```
mamba create -n turbocor rust hdf5=1.10.1
```

### Step 2: Activate the environment
```
conda activate turbocor
```

### Step 3: Set your environment variables

You will need to set this to the base of your conda environment. Change the path as appropriate for your conda installation. See the [hdf5 conda installation](https://github.com/aldanor/hdf5-rust#conda) for more details.

```
export HDF5_DIR=$HOME/miniconda3/envs/turbocor
export RUSTFLAGS="-C link-args=-Wl,-rpath,$HOME/miniconda3/envs/turbocor/lib"
```

### Step 4: Build the release

```
cargo build --release
```

and now the executable will be in the `target/release` directory, so you can either add this to your path (e.g. `PATH=$PATH:$PWD/target/release`) or remember the location (e.g. `TURBOCOR=$PWD//target/release`). 


## Using turbocor

You need your data conceptually in a matrix. `Turbocor` will read an [hdf5](https://www.hdfgroup.org/) format file with a `dataset` tag that points to a two-dimensional matrix.

### Step 1: Convert your data to hdf5 format

If you have your data in a tab-separated (or even comma-separated) text file, you can use [matrix_to_h5.py](https://github.com/linsalrob/EdwardsLab/blob/master/h5py/matrix_to_h5.py) to convert that data into the `hdf5` format file that you need.

For example, here is how to convert the matrix to an hdf5 file. In this example, `matrix.tsv` is a tab-separated matrix file that has a header row. It outputs the data into `matrix.h5` with a dataset tag `mydata` and outputs a separate file with the column names (taken from the first column) into `indices.tsv`.

```
python3 /home/edwa0468/GitHubs/EdwardsLab/h5py/matrix_to_h5.py --file matrix.tsv --output matrix.h5 --header --dataset mydata --indexfile indices.tsv
```

### Step 2: Run turbocor

Next, we run turbocor on the `matrix.h5` file. Here we use the `$TURBOCOR` path we set earlier, and output the correlations to the `matrix.cor` file.

```
$TURBOCOR/turbor compute --dataset mydata matrix.h5 matrix.cor
```

We convert that to a comma-separated list of row indices and their correlation coefficients:

### Step 3: Extract the coefficients

```
$TURBOCOR/turbor topk 1000 matrix.cor
```

You can use the `indices.tsv` file we created in step 1 to identify the row names of things that correlate with each other.

Enjoy!





