---
layout: single
show_date: true
tags : conda gpu cuda tensorflow
title: Creating a conda environment for GPU computing in Jupyter
author: Rob Edwards
---


After a few mis-steps, here is how I set up a conda environment to use in Jupyter with tensorflow, pytorch, and using the GPU.

As a note, I do this on the node with the GPU, so that things (hopefully) compile correctly!

# 1. Create an environment

First, create a new environment for tensorflow and friends, and activate it.

```
mamba create -n gpu_notebook cudatoolkit tensorflow nvidia::cuda pytorch torchvision torchaudio pytorch-cuda -c pytorch -c nvidia
mamba activate gpu_notebook
```

# 2. Install the python libraries

Install the usual suspect python packages that you will probably want to use. For convenience, I usually put these in a file in my
Git repo called `requirements.txt`.

```bash
$ cat requirements.txt 
jupyter
matplotlib
natsort
numpy
pandas
scipy
scikit-learn
seaborn
statsmodels
```

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

# 3. Reame your jupyter kernel

When you open `jupyter` there is a list of kernels that you can connect to. (If you have a window open that list will be on the top right.) If you rename your jupyter kernel it makes it 
much easier to find the kernel associated with this conda environment. The default name is something like `Python 3` which is not helpful if you have lots of them!

### a. Find where your kernel is installed

This command shows your jupyter kernels

```
jupyter kernelspec list
```

You'll see your kernel(s) and the locations of them. In the location listed there is a file called `kernel.json`. 

### b. Edit that file:

```
vi $HOME/miniconda3/envs/gpu_notebook/share/jupyter/kernels/python3/kernel.json
```

### c. Change the `name` to be meaningful

Change the value associated with the `display_name` key. Set it to something meaningful so you can find it in your browser!

# 4. Set up the XLA_FLAGS environment variable.

This was essential for me to get `tensorflow` working. There is a directory somewhere in your conda environment with the `libdevice` library that is needed. For my installation that was in `nvvm/libdevice/libdevice.10.bc`. Of course you can find yours with:

```
find ~/miniconda3/ -name libdevice
```

You want to set the `XLA_FLAGS` variable to point to the base of the `nvvm` folder. This command sets it inside the `conda` environment so it is always set when the conda environment is activated, and unset when it is deactivated.


```
conda env config vars set XLA_FLAGS=--xla_gpu_cuda_data_dir=$HOME/miniconda3/envs/gpu_notebook
```

# 5. Activate the environment

Don't forget to submit this to a node with GPU capabilities!
